Hello everyone! This tutorial will be the final one on motion tweens. We will add animation of
running to the right, left and back. In further lessons, we will still work with animations. We will have
animations for reloading, death, aiming, but this will already relate to the context of the next chapters.
In this tutorial we will do some vector math. We will calculate the
angle of the direction of movement of our character and, depending on this angle, set
our remaining three animations. Well, let's get down to updating our state machine.
Right-click in the content browser and select the
BlendSpace asset type in the Animation section . Let's name our asset BS_LocomotionWalk2 and open it.
The only difference between this asset and BlendSpace1D is that it is two-dimensional. It has two axes:
horizontal and vertical. The horizontal axis will also be responsible for the speed. Let's call it Velocity.
The minimum value will be 0, and the maximum will be the same as it was 600. We call the vertical axis Direction.
It will be responsible for the direction where our character is running and the minimum value
will be -180, and the maximum 180. That is, the direction vector will change in the right semicircle
from 0 to 180, in the left semicircle from 0 to -180. We start throwing out our animations.
Idle goes to 0 in speed and 0 in direction. RunForward goes to 0 in direction
and 600 in speed. Find the RunBackward animation and throw it to direction -180 and 180, when the deflection
angle is 180 or -180. This means that the character moves backward.
Add two animation assets for left and right movement. The directions -90 and 90 correspond to them.
We save our asset and go to the animation blueprint, to the state machine,
to the Walk state and discard our BlendSpace.
We plug the velocity variable into our new BlendSpace, pose in OutputPose. We create a variable for the
direction, we also call it Direction and we will need to calculate it. The default Direction is 0.
In this regard, nothing has changed so far, that is, our character is moving along the axis with direction = 0.
Let's start calculating this direction variable.
We open the animation blueprint, go to EventGraph and we will start by rendering the vectors,
between which we will need to calculate the angles. Let's program a little in blueprints, and then
rewrite everything in C ++. Copy the TryGetPawnOwner node. We will use a
helper node called DrawDebugArrow. This node draws a vector in 3d space.
This is what we need for rendering. Let's start by displaying the vector of the direction of our actor - Forward Vector.
In LineStart, we have the position of the character. We pass GetActorLocation there.
Next, we get the Forward Vector of our actor. We call the GetActorForwardVector function. This vector is single.
It's normalized, so let's multiply it by some length. Let it be for example 500.
And to get the LineEnd coordinate, we need to add this Forward Vector to the position of the actor.
So only I added the number, and we need a vector plus a vector.
We add the vectors, connect them to LineEnd. Let the ArrowSize be 2. Make the LineColor a shade of blue
and let the thickness be 4. Duration = 0, because every frame will be drawn this way.
We launch the project. Let's see that the arrow is displayed correctly in the direction the character is oriented.
Let's correct one parameter in the settings. Go to project settings and enter AutoExposure.
Now this effect is a bit of a nuisance because it automatically adjusts the exposure of the image.
Let's take it out. In essence, this effect simulates how the human eye adapts
to different lighting levels. Copy the nodes that display the arrow.
Let's display the velocity vector. To do this, we need to replace the Forward Vector with GetVelocity.
The velocity vector is not a unit vector. Let's normalize it. Let's use the Normilize function.
Let's change the color to red.
Compile. We launch the project and the velocity vector is displayed with a red arrow.
We move in different directions, see how it looks.
We need to calculate the angle between the direction vector and the velocity vector, and substitute this angle into the direction variable.
Now let's do some vector math.
Copy the nodes of the first vector - Forward vector.
And the second vector is the velocity vector.
The first thing we will calculate with you is the angle between these vectors. In vector mathematics, the angle between vectors is
calculated using the dot product. The function in the FVector class is called DotProduct.
DotProduct returns the cosine of the angle between vectors, if they are unity.
Therefore, to get the value of the angle, we can take the inverse function of the cosine,
which is called arccosine. This function is in the FMath class.
Let's display the value of the angle between the vectors. We use the PrintString node. We start the game.
We run straight - we have an angle of 0, we run to the left - an angle of 90, to the right - also 90 and back 180. That is, our angle is calculated correctly.
But this value is positive, regardless of whether the velocity vector is to the
right or to the left of the forward vector. Also, at zero speed, we have assignment = 90, therefore arccos (0) = 90.
We will correct this with you in the future. To determine the sign of the angle, we need a
function for calculating the cross product of two vectors. It's called CrossProduct.
We will use the following property of this mathematical operation: the vector that
is obtained as a result is orthogonal to the first and second vectors and also the fact
that UnrealEngine has a left coordinate system. That is, you and I can take the z coordinate and look at its sign.
Right-click on the pin, select SplitStructPin.
This allows you to compactly expand the coordinates of the vector and display the z coordinate. We launch the project. We run straight -
about 0, backward, too, and on the left we have a negative value for the z coordinate, and on the right, positive.
So we have all the data to calculate the signed angle - for this we need to take the sign function from the z coordinate
, which determines the sign of the number. That is, if the number is negative, then it returns -1,
and if positive, then 1 and if 0, then 0. Multiply the degrees by this value. Let's print this number.
So we check. If we run to the left, then the angle will be negative, to the right - positive.
Also, when the velocity vector = 0, CrossProduct = 0, so this
case is also handled correctly by us. In general, everything is ready. Let's plug
this value into the direction variable and see how it works. We start the game.
We run straight. We run back - the animation of running back turns on, we run to the right, to the left. At angles of 45, 15 degrees,
animations are simply interpolated. Everything is working. The only caveat is that the 135-degree
run animations don't look very nice. In general, we will not pay attention to this,
those who want can set it up so that only the animation back is displayed if the angle value is greater than 90.
So, we figured out the math, let's rewrite everything in C ++.
We will call the function of our character and substitute the value in direction.
Let's get started. Let's create a function that will return the angle value. Copy the macro
from UFUNCTION, the category will also be Movement. The function will return float. Let's call it GetMovementDirection.
Do not forget the const specifier - the
function will not change any internal data and create the function body in a .cpp file.
Now we are essentially going to program the formula that we have already calculated in the blueprints. First, let's
create a VelocityNormal variable. The normalized velocity vector will be written into this variable.
I also use auto to automatically compute the type. The function that returns the norm
is called GetSafeNormal. Next, we create a variable for the angle between our Forward vector
and the AngleBetween velocity vector. In this variable we will write arccosine from the
dot product of two vectors. Arccosine is in the FMath class, and DotProduct is in the FVector class.
We pass vectors to the DotProduct function, between which we want to calculate the
cross product: directly the ForwardVector of the actor and VelocityNormal.
Next, we calculate the cross product between the given vectors.
The CrossProduct function is in the FVector class.
We just need to calculate the final direction value and return this value.
Arccosine returns the angle in radians, so we'll use the FMath :: RadiansToDegrees function
to convert radians to degrees. We pass our AngleBetween variable there.
Then we multiply the whole thing by the sign value of the CrossProduct.Z coordinate
The Sign function is in FMath. Inserting CrossProduct.Z
Let's take another look at what we've done. First, we calculate the rate of our velocity vector.
Next, we calculate the dot product between the forward vector
and the velocity vector. We take the arccosine from the given cross product.
We get the angle between the vectors. Next, calculate the CrossProduct orthogonal vector.
We convert AngleBetween to degrees and multiply by the sign of the z coordinate of the CrossProduct variable.
We compile the project.
Let's take a look at what the CrossProduct vector looks like before replacing all our blueprints with a C ++
call. In words, it may not be entirely clear.
We connect the position of our character to LineStart.
In CrossProduct, fold all coordinates back. To do this, disconnect the thread from z. Right-click - RecombineStructPin.
And we will use an additional node that breaks vectors by coordinates. We substitute z in sign, the
site so that nothing breaks. Next, we normalize the vector that is the result of the cross
product. We multiply it by some number. We make the length 200 and add the resulting value
to the location of the actor. We insert all this into the LineEnd. Change the color to green and compile the blueprint.
By default, we have a velocity vector of 0, so the cross product is also 0. We do not see our vector.
If the velocity vector is to the right of our forward vector, then the cross
product - the green vector is directed upwards, that is, its z coordinate is positive.
If we change the direction and the velocity vector is to the left of the forward vector, then the cross product
is directed downward and the z coordinate is negative. Also, if you noticed, we
had a warning in our logs . Something about our animation blueprint was printed in yellow.
We have not taken into account one point. If we look at the animation blueprint update function, we will see
that this function is active at the moment. We can observe this along the thread with circles.
The animation blueprint function is called not only in the game, but also in the editor. Also on the left we can see that
our character's animation is updating correctly. Let's print the name of our pawn to the console using PrintString.
And from the TryGetPawnOwner node we call the GetDisplayName function. We connect to PrintString. Compile.
Let's clear the log and we see that nothing is found, because our blueprint window is now in the background. This is done from the point of
view of optimization, but if we pull out this window, we will see that an empty line is printed to the log.
Our pawn = nullptr, because the animation blueprint works as a standalone, and roughly speaking, if we referred
to a pointer in C ++ like this, we would get undefined behavior. We would
refer to a null pointer. I pulled out the auxiliary IsValid node, which will check our pawn object for nullptr,
and it was displayed in the console that our object is null. Let's put a check for validity.
To do this, we will use a macro called IsValid and connect our pawn to InputObject.
If we double-click on this macro, we will see that inside there is just a check for validity.
Compile. We look in the log - everything is clean, no warning. And also note
that the stream does not go beyond IsValid. Our check does not allow this. Let's call our function from C ++.
Let's delete all the blueprints that we used to render our vectors.
We enter the name of our GetMovementDirection function in the search.
And we connect the value that it returns to the Direction variable.
Compile. We launch the project. Checking.
We move to the right, left, back, forward. Everything works the same way as through blueprints.
Let's delete our old one-dimensional BlendSpace LocomotionWalk. Rename the current LocomotionWalk2 to simply LocomotionWalk.
We can optimize our code a little. All mathematical calculations in the GetMovementDirection function are optional,
if the speed of our character is zero, that is, if the character does not move,
his speed vector is zero, then we can immediately exit the functions and return the value 0.
We can check the speed vector using the function IsZero of the FVector class. If it returns true,
then we return 0. The next point: CrossProduct returns 0 when the two vectors
for which we calculate it are either in the same direction or opposite direction.
In our case, if the velocity vector is directed oppositely to the forward vector, this means
that the character is running backward, the return value will be equal to zero and the animation of running backward will not be turned on.
Let's fix that as well. Let's check CrossProduct for a zero vector.
To begin with, we will create an additional constant, which we will call Degrees and write into it the value that we
calculate using the RadiansToDegrees function, and if CrossProduct is a zero vector,
then we will not multiply by it and will simply return the degrees values. Let's use the ternary operator.
And if CrossProduct is not 0, then the return value will be calculated in the same way.
Since we all started checking for zero values, let's also add our functions, which are responsible for movement, to
check the Amount parameter to 0. We didn't have any errors here, because the
zero vector will be simply added. We will do this purely for cosmetic purposes.